docs: new rota help page (#2201)
keymanapp/help.keyman.com: developer/language/guide/rota-keys.md

---
title: Rotational key rules
---

Rotational keys, or "rotas" are combinations of one or more keys pressed together to produce a character or letter output, following the sequences defined by Keyman rules, and they will always end up back to the first letter as part of a rotation.

To easily understand this, check and test the rules:
```keyman
begin Unicode > use(main)
group(main) using keys

'c' + 'c' > 'č'             c caron
'č' + 'c' > 'cc'              c double c
'cc' + 'c' > 'čč'              c double c caron
'čč' + 'c' > 'c'              c back to c
```

The rules below allows the combination of <kbd>z</kbd> with one of the diacritics (\`,',~) to output v with hook and an accent (ʋ̀, ʋ́, ʋ̃). If the next key is one of the `store(diacritic_key)`, then it will produce <kbd>z</kbd>.

<img src="img/rotas.jpg" style="width:50%; align-items:center" />

```keyman
begin Unicode > use(main)
group(main) using keys

store(lat_norm_replacement) "zxc;ZXC:"
store(lat_vowel) "ʋɛɔɩƲƐƆɭ"
store(diacritic_key) "`'~"
store(diacritic) U+0300 U+0301 U+0303

any(lat_norm_replacement) + any(diacritic_key)> index(lat_vowel, 1) index(diacritic, 2) dk(one)  c z + ' > ʋ́

> any(diacritic_key) dk(one) > index(lat_norm_replacement, 1) c ʋ́ + ' > z

Author: @mcdurdin, this rule does not work. Can you help change it?

Reviewer: I am not quite sure what you are trying to do with this rule?

---
title: Rotational key rules
---

> Rotational keys or rota (aka. doublepressing) is a single key pressed to output sequences of characters or letters.

Reviewer 2: I think rotas are subtly different from double-press (multi-press gesture)

@jahorton - isn't there a gesture timeout involved for multi-press actions?

Whereas rotas are separate keyboard rules to handle the rotation of pressing the same key

Author: I was going for the names that our users asked for searchability; doublepressing was one of them. I'm going to come up with something for you both to correct again. 😄

To easily understand this, check and test the rules:
```
begin Unicode > use(main)
group(main) using keys

'c' + 'c' > 'č'             c caron
'č' + 'c' > 'cc'              c double c
'cc' + 'c' > 'čč'              c double c caron
'čč' + 'c' > 'c'              c back to c
```

It can be more complex:
```
begin Unicode > use(main)
group(main) using keys

+ [K_Z] > 'ʋ'

store(lat_norm_replacement) "zxc;ZXC:"
store(lat_vowels) "ʋɛɔɩƲƐƆɭ"

any(lat_norm_replacement) + '`' > index(lat_vowels, 1) U+0300   c ʋ̀
any(lat_norm_replacement) + "'" > index(lat_vowels, 1) U+0301   c ʋ́ 
any(lat_norm_replacement) + '~' > index(lat_vowels, 1) U+0303   c ʋ̃

'ʋ̀' + 'z' > 'z'
'ʋ́' + 'z' > 'z'

> 'ʋ̃' + 'z' > 'z'

Reviewer: This example doesn't really work. Can you explain what you were trying to do, and we can put together a concise example?

Author: I'm trying to do a rotation from 'z' -> 'ʋ̀' -> 'z'.
```
store(lat_norm_replacement) "zxc;ZXC:"
store(lat_vowels) "ʋɛɔɩƲƐƆɭ"

any(lat_norm_replacement) + '`' > index(lat_vowels, 1) U+0300   c ʋ̀
any(lat_norm_replacement) + "'" > index(lat_vowels, 1) U+0301   c ʋ́ 
any(lat_norm_replacement) + '~' > index(lat_vowels, 1) U+0303   c ʋ̃

'ʋ̀' + 'z' > 'z'
'ʋ́' + 'z' > 'z'
'ʋ̃' + 'z' > 'z'
```
I removed the line that caused the issue. Do you think it's still relevant to the document?

Reviewer: I think these lines should be replaced with:

```
store(diacritic_key) "`'~"
store(diacritic) U+0300 U+0301 U+0302

store(lat_norm_replacement) "zxc;ZXC:"
store(lat_vowel) "ʋɛɔɩƲƐƆɭ"

any(lat_norm_replacement) + any(diacritic_key) > index(lat_vowel, 1) index(diacritic, 2)

match > use(rotate_repeat)

group(rotate_repeat)
any(lat_vowel) any(diacritic) index(lat_vowel, 1) index(diacritic, 2) > index(lat_norm_replacement, 1)
```

Then you need to explain what this is doing!

'cc' + 'c' > 'čč'              c double c caron
'čč' + 'c' > 'c'              c back to c
```

The rule below allows the combination of a vowel with one of the diacritics (',\`,^) to output the vowel and an accent (à, ô, ú). After that, the rotation will happen if one of the specified diacritics is typed. Only then will it revert back to the initial vowel.

```keyman
store(vowel)  'aeiou'
store(acute)  'áéíóú'
store(grave)  'àèìòù'
store(circum) 'âêîôû'

any(vowel) + "'" > index(acute, 1)
any(acute) + "'" > index(vowel, 1)     c Point of rotation

any(vowel) + "`" > index(grave, 1)
any(grave) + "`" > index(vowel, 1)     c Point of rotation

any(vowel)  + "^" > index(circum, 1)
any(circum) + "^" > index(vowel, 1)    c Point of rotation
```

Now, this rule is a bit different. The vowel directly changes to the accented vowel when <kbd>/</kbd> is typed; it will do this four times and then reverts back to the initial vowel.

```keyman
any(vowel) + '/' > index(acute, 1)
any(acute) + '/' > index(grave, 1)
any(grave) + '/' > index(circum, 1)
any(circum) + '/' > index(vowel, 1)
```

## See also
* [store()](../reference/store)
* [any()](../reference/any)
* [index()](../reference/index)

> * [Xinaliq Keyboard Help](/keyboard/xinaliq/1.1.4/xinaliq#toc-how-to-use-this-keyboard)

Reviewer 2: I'm fine either keeping or removing the link. Keyboard authors might find it helpful to see rota examples in other keyboards (maybe a small list of rota keyboards)

---
title: Rotational key rules
---

> Rotational keys, or "rotas" are combinations of one or more keys pressed together to produce a character or letter output, following the sequences defined by Keyman rules, and they will always end up back to the first letter as part of a rotation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rotational keys, or "rotas" are combinations of one or more keys pressed in sequence to produce a character or letter output, following the sequences defined by Keyman rules, and they will always end up back to the first letter as part of a rotation.
```
